I'm Vicki Murley,
the Safari Technologies Evangelist
at Apple,
and in this presentation,
I'm going to show you how to enhance your
app with location and map information.
You'll learn the basics
of fetching a location,
and how to leverage the latest
features in iOS so that your app can
track location updates continuously,
detect significant location changes,
and display additional
information on maps with overlays.
Let's get started.
So in everyday life,
people want to know where they,
and the items they're interested in,
exist in a geographic context.
For example,
if you're thinking about buying a house,
location is a key piece of information.
You typically start with
the location and say,
"I want to live there."
When you go to a stadium,
you might be thinking,
"How close to the action am
I going to be?" Location is
key in this situation as well,
and so are other circumstances
like distance and proximity.
You might just want to know the
quickest route away from the action.
Furthermore,
the world is getting smaller.
We travel more, we interact more with
people all around the globe.
And we always have our
iPhone in our pocket.
We use it for communicating with friends,
for discovering places, for taking notes,
and for saving memories.
And the iPhone always knows where it is.
With this knowledge of location,
of what's around,
apps help keep us connected
to the surrounding world.
They can tell us what's around,
who's around, how to get there,
in many different situations:
while commuting, while shopping,
visiting new places, meeting friends,
or while playing games.
And it's not only in our spare time.
Even at work, doctors, lawyers, builders,
small businesses,
they can all take advantage of
location and the powerful features
that location-aware apps can provide.
Location is all about
knowing where you are,
what's around,
and how to get from where you
are to whatever is interesting.
So let's see how location
awareness can live in your app.
First of all,
location can have a big visual impact,
like when it's used as the
main metaphor or the central
element of the UI in your app.
This is one possible
visualization of location,
a point on a map,
as in a restaurant guide,
or maybe even a social networking app.
Or, instead of showing your
location in real time,
you might want to use location to
add information that's used later on.
For example, location can be embedded in
the photos that you take,
silently behind the scenes,
then later the location of each
photo can be shown on a map to give
that photo a much better context.
Alternately,
location can be less dominant,
less visible in your UI,
but still augment the experience.
Even if you don't show a map in your app,
location information can
still be very valuable.
That's the case in Foursquare,
where a distance indicator
shows how far away a place is.
Or in Google Places.
Notice how Google Places adds
an extra piece of information:
which direction a place is.
Very convenient.
And again,
it really augments the experience
of browsing a list of places.
Another example is Apple's own Maps app.
Something as simple as a small
thumbnail map enriches the content,
and it provides context.
Lastly,
location can facilitate actions by
doing something behind the scenes.
No maps, no indicators,
just functionality which uses
location in a subtle way to make
the app easier and faster to use.
For example, in the BART app,
location is used to provide a default
subway station as your starting point,
so that you don't have to type
this information in yourself.
The WeatherPro app detects the city
you're in so that you can easily
add that city to your favorites.
Or,
going back to the four-square example,
notice how location is used to
sort items by distance so that the
most relevant items are at the top
and less scrolling is required.
That's a common but powerful
way of facilitating a better
user experience with location.
These are the three ways that location
awareness can be expressed in your app.
Now let's look at the nuts and
bolts and see how your iOS device
retrieves location information.
Location services are provided
by the Core Location Framework,
which uses multiple sensors for obtaining
information about the user's location
and device orientation in space.
Maps are provided by
the MapKit Framework,
which supports both the
display and annotation of maps.
So let's get started by
looking at Core Location.
There are three techniques that iOS
uses for obtaining a device's position:
cell-based triangulation,
Wi-Fi triangulation, and GPS.
Cell-based triangulation provides an
accuracy between 500 and 3,000 meters.
It requires a data connection
but works well indoors,
and the accuracy is better in urban areas
where cell density might be greater.
Wi-Fi requires a data connection
and also works well indoors.
It has an accuracy
between 50 and 250 meters,
and can be just as good
or better than GPS,
especially in indoor environments.
Finally, GPS can also be used to obtain
the position of an iOS device.
It doesn't require a data connection,
and it provides accuracy in
the range of 10 to 100 meters.
So as I mentioned,
each location technique has its
own accuracy and has specific
requirements in terms of power and time.
For example, GPS is the most accurate,
but it also requires the most power
and it takes the most time to get
an accurate fix on the position.
While we as developers tend to
always think of precision first,
users are really concerned about power.
You want them to use your
app as much as possible,
so the lower your power consumption,
the better.
Another thing to
consider is availability.
3G iPads and iPhones can use
all three positioning methods,
but what about an iPod Touch?
What about a Mac running Snow Leopard?
At first glance,
it might make sense to focus
your application on devices
that support GPS positioning,
but there are some cases,
for example in indoor environments,
when Wi-Fi can locate users
even better than GPS in terms
of both time and accuracy.
And the great thing about cell-based
triangulation is that it's
available pretty much anywhere,
as long as there's a signal.
The takeaway here is really to think
through the usage scenarios for your app,
and decide which type of
location retrieval is sufficient,
instead of just choosing GPS by default.
So how do you use
Core Location in your app?
At the base level,
you have your app with a delegate object
and the Core Location framework itself.
The CL Location Manager object
is the object that you're
going to interact with.
So you can request location updates
by calling Start Updating Location.
The way location information is reported
to your app is totally asynchronous.
When a position comes in, your delegate,
which conforms to the CL Location
Manager delegate protocol,
will call the Location
Manager Did Update to Location
from Location callback.
As the user moves,
the framework repeatedly
detects new positions.
You also need to configure
the location manager.
When you're doing this,
the first thing you need to consider
is what accuracy you require.
This is an indication of how precise
a measurement you're going to need.
It's measured as the maximum difference
you're willing to accept between
the detected position and where
the user actually is in meters.
You should also specify
a distance filter.
Normally,
you don't need to get a new location
every time the user moves a tiny bit,
but only when the user
moves significantly.
By specifying a distance filter that's
reasonable for your application,
you can save system
resources such as power.
You also might want to check if location
services are even enabled before
you call Start Updating Location.
So if your attempt to
fetch a location fails,
there are two key errors
that you might get:
KCL Error Location
Unknown or KCL Error Denied.
KCL error location unknown is reported
when a location cannot be determined,
and this is a temporary error.
Maybe the user has temporarily
lost network connectivity if
they've gone underground on the
subway or they're in a remote area.
KCL Error Denied is reported when the
user has explicitly denied location
services for your application,
and they can do this in
a few different ways.
The first way that users can deny
location services is by tapping
Don't Allow on this dialog.
It pops up the very first time that
your application requests a location,
and if a user taps Don't Allow,
then that decision sticks.
It's important to provide
a good description of why
your app needs location,
or how it's going to
use this information.
You can communicate this
information to users via the
Purpose property in your code.
There are also switches and settings that
control access to location information.
There's a global switch,
which enables or disables
location services for all apps.
And there's a list of switches
for each individual app that
has requested location services.
In this list of apps,
sometimes you'll see
this location arrow icon.
It indicates that the app has requested
a location in the last 24 hours.
Keep in mind that users can
toggle these switches at any time,
even when your application is running,
and then your app will receive
the KCL error denied error code.
So now let's talk about a
few best practices for using
the Core Location Framework.
Remember that sometimes
certain environments can
make positioning difficult.
If you receive a KCL Error
Location Unknown error,
call Stop Updating Location and try
to fetch the location again later,
when conditions may have changed.
Also, you might be fetching location
information until you receive a
location that has the accuracy
that you're looking for.
Since positioning can be
difficult in certain environments,
your desired accuracy might
never actually be obtained,
so be sure to put a limit on the amount
of time you spend fetching location
information and call Stop Updating
Location once that time period expires.
You should also always remember to call
Stop Updating Location when your app
doesn't actively require a location.
Doing so will really save
a lot of power for users.
For example,
if your application uses location
only in a specific view or tab,
then you don't want to keep the
location manager running all the time,
because maybe the user won't even
go into that section of your app.
In that case,
you want to start and stop updating
location when the user enters and
exits that section of your UI.
To double check that you're
doing things properly,
you can look at the status bar
and make sure that the location
indicator is not active when your app
doesn't actively require a location.
Finally,
always remember to have a Plan B.
You should always provide a
fallback experience in your app
in cases where a location or
map tiles may not be available.
So far, we've been talking about
a question and answer.
You might be wondering what happens
if your app doesn't have a location,
but what about tracking
location as the device moves?
Your app might require
tracking location all the time,
maybe even when your app has
been switched to the background.
So I want my app to keep tracking
location as the device moves,
no matter what I'm doing,
whether the app is in the
foreground or the background.
How can I do this?
Well,
Apple has introduced support for what we
call continuous location applications.
All you have to do is add this
one key to your Info.plist file,
and once that's set,
if your application calls
start updating location and
then goes into the background,
it will keep running as long as
you keep updating the location.
Since this is an expensive operation,
you should only use this when
it provides an immediate,
tangible benefit to the user.
There are other cases when we don't want
precise location tracking all the time.
Suppose we're traveling,
and every once in a while we
take a photo or record a note,
and we want to store the
location for each of those.
To do this,
we can use a technique which only
notifies us and wakes up our app when a
significant location change has occurred.
In this case, cell-based triangulation
is generally used.
For significant location changes,
the location is calculated when
the device switches cell towers,
or when other applications
use location services.
So when one of these significant
location changes occurs,
your application will be launched in the
background to retrieve that location.
While the accuracy of significant
location changes is generally
similar to cell-based triangulation,
if some other app in the system
is asking for a more precise
location and causes GPS to be used,
you'll get this more
accurate location for free.
So how do you implement this in your app?
This slide probably looks familiar.
You've seen it before when
I was explaining how to
start up location services.
All you really need to
do is replace this call,
"Start updating location," with
one that's called "Start monitoring
significant location changes."
Once you call that,
you'll get the same delegate method,
no matter whether your app is frontmost
or suspended in the background.
If it is in the background,
your app will resume so that your
delegate method can be executed.
There are times that a very specific
location is all that's really important,
when a user gets close to,
or goes far from, a specific place.
For this type of scenario,
there is a technique
called Region Monitoring.
While in the background,
we use cell triangulation,
but we only notify you when the user
is close to that specific location.
Implementing this functionality
in your app is really simple.
The first thing you need to do is
create what's called a CLRegion object.
It's defined by a center and a radius,
how large you want it to be,
and an identifier.
Next, you call startMonitoringForRegion,
passing in that region.
At this point, your delegate will receive
one of two callbacks:
Location Manager Did Enter Region or
Location Manager Did Exit Region.
The great thing about these services
is that they can be used even if
your application is not running.
If your app moves to the background,
location services are still tracking
the user and determining the location.
The great thing about these services
is that they can be used even if
your application isn't running.
If your application hasn't been launched
or if your app moves to the background,
the location service is still tracking
the user and determining the location.
Since your app can be
launched in the background,
it's worth mentioning the
MVC paradigm around which all
iOS applications are based.
Generally, you've got your model,
which is your data, the view objects,
which control how the
data appears on screen,
and the controller that sits in between.
Now in a lot of apps,
the location manager is actually
used by view controllers.
But when the app is
launched in the background,
the view hierarchy does not get set up.
And so if you instantiate a
location manager object as
part of your view controller,
it will never be created and you
will never get the location events.
When your app is launched
in the background,
your app delegate is sent this message.
There's an options dictionary which
can tell you whether the app was
launched because of a location event.
Note that if your application is
killed in the background and the user
launches it before the next event,
this key won't be present.
So generally,
you're going to want to use an
application-wide controller to
instantiate a location manager object.
You'll set the delegate to such
controller in order for the location
manager to be able to deliver messages,
and that's it.
What are some best practices for using
the Core Location Framework in this way?
For instance, you might want to use the
UI Device APIs to decide
what functionality to
enable in the background.
Based on the battery charge level,
you can decide whether to keep
monitoring location changes,
or even modify the level of
accuracy that you require.
Now let's move on to talking
about what's new in MapKit.
The MapKit framework provides standard
views that you can incorporate into
your application to display information
tied to a specific geographic point.
MapKit has always provided
support for annotations,
which represent a
single point on the map.
New in iOS 4.0,
MapKit also provides a way
to add overlays to maps.
MapKit overlays are great because
they'll pan and zoom along with
the rest of the map content as the
map is manipulated by the user.
This provides a seamless and
polished experience as if the
overlay itself is part of the map.
There are four different types
of overlays available in MapKit.
The first type of overlay is a circle.
You can create and draw circles with
the MKCircle and MKCircleView classes,
and use these to highlight
a circular region on a map.
For instance,
maybe you want to show something
like signal strength or the
accuracy of a retrieved location.
You can also draw lines
on a map as an overlay,
using MKPolyline and MKPolylineView.
Polygons are the third type of
overlay supported in MapKit.
You can use MKPolyline and
MKPolylineView to highlight
a specific area on a map,
and you can even mask out portions
of the polygon by specifying
one or more interior polygons.
And finally, you can create your own
custom type of overlay.
So you can really depict any type of data
that you want as an overlay on a map.
So how do I add an overlay to my map?
Well,
if you've programmed with MapKit before,
this probably sounds familiar,
because adding overlays to the map
is a lot like adding annotations.
There's really just two steps.
The first step is to add your
overlay model object to the map,
and after that,
you display the overlay by providing the
corresponding view from the delegate.
Here's what the code for
that might look like.
Here in ViewDidLoad,
we're creating our overlay object.
It's just a circle with a
CoreLocation2D coordinate as its center,
and it has a radius of 200.
We add our circle overlay to the map by
passing it to the Add Overlay method.
But just adding the model to the map
doesn't necessarily draw the overlay,
which is good because the region of
the map with your overlay might not
even be on screen at this point.
When MapKit detects that the region
that contains your overlay is coming
into view and needs to be drawn,
you'll get a callback on
your MapView delegate,
ViewForOverlay.
When you receive this delegate callback,
ViewForOverlay, that's when you're going
to create the view.
Since we have an MKCircle overlay,
we're going to create an MKCircle view,
and here we're customizing the look
of that circle just a little bit by
adding a red stroke around the circle,
and filling the circle with red as well,
with a 40% opacity so that users
can see through it to the map.
So there you have it.
Now you have the resources you
need to enhance your existing
app with location information,
or even build an entirely new app around
the location services provided in iOS.
I'm really looking forward to
seeing what you come up with.